One of the things you can do with an XML Schema is check if an
XML document is valid according to the schema.
Java has a standard API for validating XML against a schema,
and JAXB can use this for validation during marshalling and unmarshalling.
When you design a software system,
it's important to validate data that enters the system for two main reasons.
First,
you don't want your system to stop working or do undefined
things when invalid data is entered.
And second,
you want to guard the integrity of the data in the system to
prevent that over time your database becomes a mess with
incomplete or invalid records.
When your system is receiving data as XML,
and you're using JAXB to read the XML,
then you can tell the unmarshaller to validate the
incoming XML against the schema.
Also, when your system is sending out XML,
you might want to validate it during marshalling to be
sure that it's sending out valid XML.
Validating against the schema during marshalling and
unmarshalling is fortunately very easy to set up.
Let's take a look at example ps-jaxb-23-validation-1 to see how to do this.
Let's first take a look at unmarshalling, so let's open class UnmarshalExample.
This example is very simple.
It unmarshals the file purchaseOrder.
xml and prints the name of the customer in the purchaseOrder.
Note that by default, no validation is done.
If I added the XML so that it isn't valid anymore,
for example, by removing the required name element from the customer element,
the unmarshaller will unmarshal it without any error,
and the name of the customer will just be set to null.
To enable validation, we first have to load the XSD.
For that, we are going to use a few classes from the XML validation API.
Many of the Java XML APIs work with factory classes and methods.
To be able to load an XSD,
we first need to create a schemaFactory object with the method SchemaFactory.
newInstance.
We have to pass a string that identifies the schema language to this method.
In principle, the XML validation API can support different schema languages,
not just XSD.
We are using standard XSD here,
so we have to pass the namespace URI of XML_SCHEMA here,
for which there is a constant in the class XMLConstants.
Now we have a schemaFactory that can make schema objects from XSDs,
and it's very easy to create a schema object for our XSD,
purchaseOrder.
xsd, by calling the new schema method on the factory.
To make the unmarshaller use the schema,
all we have to do is call setSchema on the unmarshaller,
passing it the schema object.
When we now run the example again with the name of
the customer missing in the XML,
we get an UnmarshalException because the XML is not valid.
Next, let's take a look at how we can customize handling validation errors.
Besides setting a schema on the unmarshaller,
you can also set a ValidationEventHandler.
I've implemented an ExampleValidationEventHandler
and set it on the unmarshaller.
The handleEvent method of this handler will be called
when a validation error occurs,
and it gets passed a ValidationEvent which contains information on the error.
There's a lot of information in the validation object,
for example, the severity of the problem,
which can be warning error or fatal error,
and information on where exactly in the XML the error occurred.
The ExampleValidationEventHandler just prints some
information and then returns true,
which tells the unmarshaller to try to continue parsing the XML if possible.
When I now run the example again,
you see that there is one fatal error in line 18,
column 26 of purchaseOrder.
xml.
Finally, let's look at validation during marshalling.
There's not a lot to explain here because it works in
exactly the same way as with unmarshalling.
You can set a schema and a ValidationEventHandler on the marshaller
in the same way as you do on the unmarshaller.
To show you that it works,
I've commented out setting the order date on the purchase
order in the createPurchaseOrder method.
The orderDate attribute is required according to the XSD,
so it should complain if I run this.
As you can see, it indeed prints a fatal error.
In this case,
it still produces XML output because the handleEvent method of
the ExampleValidationEventHandler returns true,
which tells the marshaller to continue even if there's an error.
I could, of course,
change this and make it return false to prevent
invalid XML from being generated.
The marshaller would then stop with the marshal exception when a validation error occurs.